Concatenating strings
In this exercise and the ones that follow, we are going to derive new fields from columns within the customer and film tables of the DVD rental database.

We'll start with the customer table and create a query to return the customers name and email address formatted such that we could use it as a "To" field in an email script or program. This format will look like the following:

Brian Piccolo <bpiccolo@datacamp.com>

In the first step of the exercise, use the || operator to do the string concatenation and in the second step, use the CONCAT() functions.

1. Concatenate the first_name and last_name columns separated by a single space followed by email surrounded by < and >.
-- Concatenate the first_name and last_name and email 
SELECT first_name || ' ' || last_name || ' <' || email || '>' AS full_email 
FROM customer

2. Now use the CONCAT() function to do the same operation as the previous step.
-- Concatenate the first_name and last_name and email
SELECT CONCAT(first_name, ' ', last_name, ' <', email, '>') AS full_email 
FROM customer



Changing the case of string data
Now you are going to use the film and category tables to create a new field called film_category by concatenating the category name with the film's title. You will also format the result using functions you learned about in the video to transform the case of the fields you are selecting in the query; for example, the INITCAP() function which converts a string to title case.

Convert the film category name to uppercase.
Convert the first letter of each word in the film's title to upper case.
Concatenate the converted category name and film title separated by a colon.
Convert the description column to lowercase.
SELECT 
  -- Concatenate the category name to coverted to uppercase
  -- to the film title converted to title case
  UPPER(c.name)  || ': ' || INITCAP(f.title) AS film_category, 
  -- Convert the description column to lowercase
  LOWER(f.description) AS description
FROM 
  film AS f 
  INNER JOIN film_category AS fc 
  	ON f.film_id = fc.film_id 
  INNER JOIN category AS c 
  	ON fc.category_id = c.category_id;



Replacing string data
Sometimes you will need to make sure that the data you are extracting does not contain any whitespace. There are many different approaches you can take to cleanse and prepare your data for these situations. A common technique is to replace any whitespace with an underscore.

In this example, we are going to practice finding and replacing whitespace characters in the title column of the film table using the REPLACE()

Replace all whitespace with an underscore.
SELECT 
  -- Replace whitespace in the film title with an underscore
  REPLACE(title, ' ', '_') AS title
FROM film; 



Determining the length of strings
Determining the number of characters in a string is something that you will use frequently when working with data in a SQL database. Many situations will require you to find the length of a string stored in your database. For example, you may need to limit the number of characters that are displayed in an application or you may need to ensure that a column in your dataset contains values that are all the same length. In this example, we are going to determine the length of the description column in the film table of the DVD Rental database.

Select the title and description columns from the film table.
Find the number of characters in the description column with the alias desc_len.
SELECT 
  -- Select the title and description columns
  title,
  description,
  -- Determine the length of the description column
  LENGTH(description) AS desc_len
FROM film;



Truncating strings
In the previous exercise, you calculated the length of the description column and noticed that the number of characters varied but most of the results were over 75 characters. There will be many times when you need to truncate a text column to a certain length to meet specific criteria for an application. In this exercise, we will practice getting the first 50 characters of the description column.

Select the first 50 characters of the description column with the alias short_desc
SELECT 
  -- Select the first 50 characters of description
  LEFT(description, 50) AS short_desc
FROM 
  film AS f; 



Extracting substrings from text data
In this exercise, you are going to practice how to extract substrings from text columns. The Sakila database contains the address table which stores the street address for all the rental store locations. You need a list of all the street names where the stores are located but the address column also contains the street number. You'll use several functions that you've learned about in the video to manipulate the address column and return only the street address.

Extract only the street address without the street number from the address column.
Use functions to determine the starting and ending position parameters.
SELECT 
  -- Select only the street name from the address table
  SUBSTRING(address FROM POSITION(' ' IN address)+1 FOR LENGTH(address))
FROM 
  address;



Combining functions for string manipulation
In the next example, we are going to break apart the email column from the customer table into three new derived fields. Parsing a single column into multiple columns can be useful when you need to work with certain subsets of data. Email addresses have embedded information stored in them that can be parsed out to derive additional information about our data. For example, we can use the techniques we learned about in the video to determine how many of our customers use an email from a specific domain.

Extract the characters to the left of the @ of the email column in the customer table and alias it as username.
Now use SUBSTRING to extract the characters after the @ of the email column and alias the new derived field as domain.
SELECT
  -- Extract the characters to the left of the '@'
  LEFT(email, POSITION('@' IN email)-1) AS username,
  -- Extract the characters to the right of the '@'
  SUBSTRING(email FROM POSITION('@' IN email)+1 FOR LENGTH(email)) AS domain
FROM customer;



