Explore table sizes
Let's start by exploring five related tables:

stackoverflow: questions asked on Stack Overflow with certain tags
company: information on companies related to tags in stackoverflow
tag_company: links stackoverflow to company
tag_type: type categories applied to tags in stackoverflow
fortune500: information on top US companies
Count the number of columns in a table by selecting a few rows and manually counting the columns in the result.

Which table has the most rows?
SELECT * FROM stackoverflow
LIMIT 5;
R: Stackoverflow


Count missing values
Which column of fortune500 has the most missing values? To find out, you'll need to check each column individually, although here we'll check just two: ticker and industry.

Course Note: While you're unlikely to encounter this issue during this exercise, note that if you run a query that takes more than a few seconds to execute, your session may expire or you may be disconnected from the server. You will not have this issue with any of the exercise solutions, so if your session expires or disconnects, there's an error with your query.

1. Subtract the count of the non-null ticker values from the total number of rows in fortune500; alias the difference as missing.
-- Count the number of null values in the ticker column
SELECT count(*) - COUNT(ticker) AS missing
  FROM fortune500;
R//:32

2. Repeat for the industry column: subtract the count of the non-null industry values from the total number of rows in fortune500; alias the difference as missing.
-- Count the number of null values in the industry column
SELECT count(*) - count(industry) AS missing from fortune500
R//: 13



Join tables
Part of exploring a database is figuring out how tables relate to each other. The company and fortune500 tables don't have a formal relationship between them in the database, but this doesn't prevent you from joining them.

To join the tables, you need to find a column that they have in common where the values are consistent across the tables. Remember: just because two tables have a column with the same name, it doesn't mean those columns necessarily contain compatible data. If you find more than one pair of columns with similar data, you may need to try joining with each in turn to see if you get the same number of results.

Reference the entity relationship diagram if needed.

Closely inspect the contents of the company and fortune500 tables to find a column present in both tables that can also be considered to uniquely identify each company.
Join the company and fortune500 tables with an INNER JOIN.

SELECT company.name
-- Table(s) to select from
FROM company
INNER JOIN fortune500 ON company.ticker=fortune500.ticker;



Foreign keys
Recall that foreign keys reference another row in the database via a unique ID. Values in a foreign key column are restricted to values in the referenced column OR NULL.

Using what you know about foreign keys, why can't the tag column in the tag_type table be a foreign key that references the tag column in the stackoverflow table?

Remember, you can reference the slides using the icon in the upper right of the screen to review the requirements for a foreign key.
R: stackoverflow.tag contains duplicate values



Read an entity relationship diagram
The information you need is sometimes split across multiple tables in the database.
What is the most common stackoverflow tag_type? What companies have a tag of that type?
To generate a list of such companies, you'll need to join three tables together.
Reference the entity relationship diagram as needed when determining which columns to use when joining tables.

1. First, using the tag_type table, count the number of tags with each type.
Order the results to find the most common tag type.
-- Count the number of tags with each type
SELECT type, count(*) AS count
FROM tag_type
 -- To get the count for each type, what do you need to do?
GROUP BY type
 -- Order the results with the most common tag types listed first
ORDER BY count DESC;

2. Join the tag_company, company, and tag_type tables, keeping only mutually occurring records.
Select company.name, tag_type.tag, and tag_type.type for tags with the most common type from the previous step.
-- Select the 3 columns desired
SELECT name, tag_type.tag, tag_type.type
  FROM company
  	   -- Join the tag_company and company tables
       INNER JOIN tag_company 
       ON company.id = tag_company.company_id
       -- Join the tag_type and company tables
       INNER JOIN tag_type
       ON tag_company.tag = tag_type.tag
  -- Filter to most common type
WHERE type='cloud';



Coalesce
The coalesce() function can be useful for specifying a default or backup value when a column contains NULL values.

coalesce() checks arguments in order and returns the first non-NULL value, if one exists.

coalesce(NULL, 1, 2) = 1
coalesce(NULL, NULL) = NULL
coalesce(2, 3, NULL) = 2
In the fortune500 data, industry contains some missing values. Use coalesce() to use the value of sector as the industry when industry is NULL. Then find the most common industry.

Instructions
Use coalesce() to select the first non-NULL value from industry, sector, or 'Unknown' as a fallback value.
Alias the result of the call to coalesce() as industry2.
Count the number of rows with each industry2 value.
Find the most common value of industry2.

-- Use coalesce
SELECT coalesce(industry, sector, 'Unknown') AS industry2,
-- Don't forget to count!
       count(*) AS count_industry
FROM fortune500 
-- Group by what? (What are you counting by?)
GROUP BY industry2
-- Order results to see most common first
ORDER BY count_industry DESC
-- Limit results to get just the one value you want
LIMIT 1;



Effects of casting
When you cast data from one type to another, information can be lost or changed. See how the casting changes values and practice casting data using the CAST() function and the :: syntax.

SELECT CAST(value AS new_type);
SELECT value::new_type;

1. Select profits_change and profits_change cast as integer from fortune500.
Look at how the values were converted.
-- Select the original value
SELECT profits_change, 
	   -- Cast profits_change
       CAST(profits_change as INTEGER) AS profits_change_int
  FROM fortune500;

profits_change	profits_change_int
-7.2	          -7

2. Compare the results of casting of dividing the integer value 10 by 3 to the result 
of dividing the numeric value 10 by 3.
-- Divide 10 by 3
SELECT 10/3, 
       -- Cast 10 as numeric and divide by 3
       10::numeric/3;

?column?	?column?
3	        3.3333333333333333

3. Now cast numbers that appear as text as numeric.
Note: 1e3 is scientific notation.

SELECT '3.2'::numeric,
       '-123'::numeric,
       '1e3'::numeric,
       '1e-3'::numeric,
       '02314'::numeric,
       '0002'::numeric;

numeric	numeric	numeric	numeric	numeric	numeric
3.2	    -123	  1000	  0.001   2314	  2



Summarize the distribution of numeric values
Was 2017 a good or bad year for revenue of Fortune 500 companies? Examine how revenue changed from 2016 to 2017 by first looking at the distribution of revenues_change and then counting companies whose revenue increased.

1.Use GROUP BY and count() to examine the values of revenues_change.
Order the results by revenues_change to see the distribution.
-- Select the count of each value of revenues_change
SELECT revenues_change, count(*)
FROM fortune500
GROUP BY revenues_change
 -- order by the values of revenues_change
ORDER BY revenues_change ASC;

revenues_change	count
-57.5	          1
-53.3	          1

2.Repeat step 1, but this time, cast revenues_change as an integer to reduce the number of different values.
-- Select the count of each revenues_change integer value
SELECT revenues_change::integer, count(*)
FROM fortune500
GROUP BY revenues_change::integer
 -- order by the values of revenues_change
ORDER BY revenues_change ASC;

revenues_change	count
-58	            1
-53	            1

3.How many of the Fortune 500 companies had revenues increase in 2017 compared to 2016? To find out, count the rows of fortune500 where revenues_change indicates an increase.
-- Count rows 
SELECT COUNT(*)
FROM fortune500
 -- Where...
 WHERE revenues_change > 0;

R:298
