Division
Compute the average revenue per employee for Fortune 500 companies by sector.

Compute revenue per employee by dividing revenues by employees; casting is used here to produce a numeric result.
Take the average of revenue per employee with avg(); alias this as avg_rev_employee.
Group by sector.
Order by the average revenue per employee.

-- Select average revenue per employee by sector
SELECT sector, 
       AVG(revenues/employees::numeric) AS avg_rev_employee
  FROM fortune500
 GROUP BY sector
 -- Use the column alias to order the results
 ORDER BY AVG(revenues/employees::numeric)



Explore with division
In exploring a new database, it can be unclear what the data means and how columns are related to each other.

What information does the unanswered_pct column in the stackoverflow table contain? Is it the percent of questions with the tag that are unanswered (unanswered ?s with tag/all ?s with tag)? Or is it something else, such as the percent of all unanswered questions on the site with the tag (unanswered ?s with tag/all unanswered ?s)?

Divide unanswered_count (unanswered ?s with tag) by question_count (all ?s with tag) to see if the value matches that of unanswered_pct to determine the answer.

Exclude rows where question_count is 0 to avoid a divide by zero error.
Limit the result to 10 rows.

-- Divide unanswered_count by question_count
SELECT unanswered_count/question_count::numeric AS computed_pct, 
       -- What are you comparing the above quantity to?
       unanswered_pct
FROM stackoverflow
 -- Select rows where question_count is not 0
WHERE question_count <> 0
Limit 10;



Summarize numeric columns
Summarize the profit column in the fortune500 table using the functions you've learned.

You can access the course slides for reference using the PDF icon in the upper right corner of the screen.

1. Compute the min(), avg(), max(), and stddev() of profits; don't use any aliases here.
-- Select min, avg, max, and stddev of fortune500 profits
SELECT MIN(profits),
       AVG(profits),
       MAX(profits),
       stddev(profits)
  FROM fortune500;

2. Repeat Step 1, but this time, creating a grouped summary of profits by sector, ordering the results by the average profits for each sector; don't use any aliases here.

-- Select sector and summary measures of fortune500 profits
SELECT 
      sector, 
      MIN(profits),
      AVG(profits),
      MAX(profits),
      stddev(profits)
FROM fortune500
 -- What to group by?
GROUP BY sector
 -- Order by the average profits
ORDER BY avg;



Summarize group statistics
Sometimes you want to understand how a value varies across groups. For example, how does the maximum value per group vary across groups?

To find out, first summarize by group, and then compute summary statistics of the group results. One way to do this is to compute group values in a subquery, and then summarize the results of the subquery.

For this exercise, what is the standard deviation across tags in the maximum number of Stack Overflow questions per day? What about the mean, min, and max of the maximums as well?

Start by writing a subquery to compute the max() of question_count per tag; alias the subquery result as maxval.
Then compute the standard deviation of maxval with stddev().
Compute the min(), max(), and avg() of maxval too.

-- Compute standard deviation of maximum values
SELECT stddev(maxval),
	   -- min
       MIN(maxval),
       -- max
       MAX(maxval),
       -- avg
       AVG(maxval)
  -- Subquery to compute max of question_count by tag
  FROM (
        SELECT MAX(question_count) AS maxval
        FROM stackoverflow
         -- Compute max by...
        GROUP BY tag) AS max_results; -- alias for subquery



Truncate (BINS)
Use trunc() to examine the distributions of attributes of the Fortune 500 companies.

Remember that trunc() truncates numbers by replacing lower place value digits with zeros:

trunc(value_to_truncate, places_to_truncate)
Negative values for places_to_truncate indicate digits to the left of the decimal to replace, 
while positive values indicate digits to the right of the decimal to keep.

1. Use trunc() to truncate employees to the 100,000s (5 zeros).
Count the number of observations with each truncated value.
-- Truncate employees
SELECT trunc(employees, -5) AS employee_bin,
       -- Count number of companies with each truncated value
       count(employees)
FROM fortune500
 -- Use alias to group
GROUP BY employee_bin
 -- Use alias to order
ORDER BY employee_bin;

2. 
Repeat step 1 for companies with < 100,000 employees (most common).
This time, truncate employees to the 10,000s place.
-- Truncate employees
SELECT trunc(employees, -4) AS employee_bin,
       -- Count number of companies with each truncated value
       count(employees)
FROM fortune500
 -- Limit to which companies?
WHERE employees < 100000
 -- Use alias to group
GROUP BY employee_bin
 -- Use alias to order
ORDER BY employee_bin;



Generate series
Summarize the distribution of the number of questions with the tag "dropbox" on 
Stack Overflow per day by binning the data.

Recall:
generate_series(from, to, step)
You can reference the slides using the PDF icon in the upper right corner of the screen.

1. Start by selecting the minimum and maximum of the question_count column for 
the tag 'dropbox' so you know the range of values to cover with the bins.
-- Select the min and max of question_count
SELECT MIN(question_count), 
       MAX(question_count)
  -- From what table?
FROM stackoverflow
 -- For tag dropbox
WHERE tag = 'dropbox';

min		max
2315	3072

2. Next, use generate_series() to create bins of size 50 from 2200 to 3100.
To do this, you need an upper and lower bound to define a bin.
This will require you to modify the stopping value of the lower bound and 
the starting value of the upper bound by the bin width.
-- Create lower and upper bounds of bins
SELECT generate_series(2200, 3050, 50) AS lower,
       generate_series(2250, 3100, 50) AS upper;

lower	upper
2200	2250
2250	2300

3. Select lower and upper from bins, along with the count of values within each bin bounds.

To do this, you'll need to join 'dropbox', which contains the question_count 
for tag "dropbox", to the bins created by generate_series().
The join should occur where the count is greater than or equal to the lower bound, 
and strictly less than the upper bound.

-- Bins created in Step 2
WITH bins AS (
      SELECT generate_series(2200, 3050, 50) AS lower,
             generate_series(2250, 3100, 50) AS upper),
     -- Subset stackoverflow to just tag dropbox (Step 1)
     dropbox AS (
      SELECT question_count 
        FROM stackoverflow
       WHERE tag='dropbox') 
       -- Select columns for result

-- What column are you counting to summarize?
SELECT lower, upper, count(question_count) 
  FROM bins  -- Created above
       -- Join to dropbox (created above), keeping all rows from the bins     --table in the join
        LEFT JOIN dropbox
       -- Compare question_count to lower and upper
         ON question_count >= lower 
        AND question_count < upper
 -- Group by lower and upper to count values in each bin
 GROUP BY lower, upper
 -- Order by lower to put bins in order
 ORDER BY lower;

lower	upper	count
2200	2250	0
2250	2300	0
2300	2350	22




Correlation
What's the relationship between a company's revenue and its other financial attributes? Compute the correlation between revenues and other financial variables with the corr() function.

Compute the correlation between revenues and profits.
Compute the correlation between revenues and assets.
Compute the correlation between revenues and equity.

-- Correlation between revenues and profit
SELECT corr(revenues,profits) AS rev_profits,
	   -- Correlation between revenues and assets
       corr(revenues,assets)  AS rev_assets,
       -- Correlation between revenues and equity
       corr(revenues,equity) AS rev_equity 
  FROM fortune500;

rev_profits			rev_assets			rev_equity
0.5999935815724783	0.3294995213185059	0.5465709997184311



Mean and Median
Compute the mean (avg()) and median assets of Fortune 500 companies by sector.
Use the percentile_disc() function to compute the median:
percentile_disc(0.5) 
WITHIN GROUP (ORDER BY column_name)

Select the mean and median of assets.
Group by sector.
Order the results by the mean.

-- What groups are you computing statistics by?
SELECT sector,
       -- Select the mean of assets with the avg function
       AVG(assets) AS mean,
       -- Select the median
       percentile_disc(0.5) WITHIN GROUP (ORDER BY assets) AS median
  FROM fortune500
 -- Computing statistics for each what?
 GROUP BY sector
 -- Order results by a value of interest
 ORDER BY AVG(assets);



Create a temp table
Find the Fortune 500 companies that have profits in the top 20% for their 
sector (compared to other Fortune 500 companies).

To do this, first, find the 80th percentile of profit for each sector with
	percentile_disc(fraction) 
	WITHIN GROUP (ORDER BY sort_expression)
	and save the results in a temporary table.

Then join fortune500 to the temporary table to select companies with profits 
greater than the 80th percentile cut-off.

1. Create a temporary table called profit80 containing the sector and
80th percentile of profits for each sector.
Alias the percentile column as pct80.

 -- Select the two columns you need; alias as needed
  SELECT sector, 
         percentile_disc(0.8) WITHIN GROUP (ORDER BY profits) AS pct80
    -- What table are you getting the data from?
  FROM fortune500
   -- What do you need to group by?
  GROUP BY sector;
   
-- See what you created: select all columns and rows from the table you created
SELECT * 
  FROM profit80;

2. Using the profit80 table you created in step 1, 
select companies that have profits greater than pct80.
Select the title, sector, profits from fortune500, as well as the ratio of the company's profits
to the 80th percentile profit.

-- Code from previous step
DROP TABLE IF EXISTS profit80;

CREATE TEMP TABLE profit80 AS
  SELECT sector, 
         percentile_disc(0.8) WITHIN GROUP (ORDER BY profits) AS pct80
    FROM fortune500 
   GROUP BY sector;

-- Select columns, aliasing as needed
SELECT title,  
       fortune500.sector,
       profits,
       profits/pct80 AS ratio
-- What tables do you need to join?  
  FROM fortune500 
  LEFT JOIN profit80
-- How are the tables joined?
       ON fortune500.sector=profit80.sector
-- What rows do you want to select?
 WHERE profits > pct80;



Create a temp table to simplify a query
The Stack Overflow data contains daily question counts through 2018-09-25 for all tags, 
but each tag has a different starting date in the data.

Find out how many questions had each tag on the first date for which data for the tag is available, 
as well as how many questions had the tag on the last day. Also, compute the difference between these two values.

To do this, first compute the minimum date for each tag.

Then use the minimum dates to select the question_count on both the first and last day. 
To do this, join the temp table startdates to two different copies of the stackoverflow 
table: one for each column - first day and last day - aliased with different names.

1. First, create a temporary table called startdates with each tag and the min() date
for the tag in stackoverflow.

-- To clear table if it already exists
DROP TABLE IF EXISTS startdates;

-- Create temp table syntax
CREATE TEMP TABLE stardates AS
-- Compute the minimum date for each what?
  SELECT tag,
         MIN(date) AS mindate
  FROM stackoverflow
  -- What do you need to compute the min date for each tag?
  GROUP BY tag;
 
 -- Look at the table you created
 SELECT * 
   FROM stardates;

2. Join startdates to stackoverflow twice using different table aliases.
For each tag, select mindate, question_count on the mindate, 
and question_count on 2018-09-25 (the max date).
Compute the change in question_count over time.

DROP TABLE IF EXISTS startdates;

CREATE TEMP TABLE startdates AS
SELECT tag, min(date) AS mindate
  FROM stackoverflow
 GROUP BY tag;
 
-- Select tag (Remember the table name!) and mindate
SELECT so_min.tag, 
       so_min.date, 
       -- Select question count on the min and max days
	     so_min.question_count AS min_date_question_count,
       so_max.question_count AS max_date_question_count,
       -- Compute the change in question_count (max- min)
       so_max.question_count - so_min.question_count AS change
  FROM startdates
       -- Join startdates to stackoverflow with alias so_min
       INNER JOIN stackoverflow AS so_min
          -- What needs to match between tables?
          ON startdates.tag = so_min.tag
         AND startdates.mindate = so_min.date
       -- Join to stackoverflow again with alias so_max
       INNER JOIN stackoverflow AS so_max
       	  -- Again, what needs to match between tables?
          ON startdates.tag = so_max.tag
         AND so_max.date = '2018-09-25';

tag			date		min_date_question_count	max_date_question_count	change
paypal		2016-01-01	13296					18050					4754
amazon-elb	2016-09-01	576						1452					876
